---
layout: page
title: "DH on the Go"
permalink: /dh-on-the-go
---

_DH on the Go_ aggregates audio and video recordings of material of interest to a DH audience. Below you will find a running list of citations and accompanying links based on contributions to the accompanying [Zotero group](https://www.zotero.org/groups/5625243/digital_humanities_on_the_go). If you're looking for something to keep you company on a long commute—we got you. If you're looking for something to put on your headphones while doing chores—we're here for you too. If you want to promote your own video or audio recordings—promote away. If you're searching for a way to make your local DH event live on beyond a couple social media posts sharing—please do share. 

Let's go.

## The Why

The project has a very personal origin: I've always been someone who learns best while listening. And as I've gotten older and busier, I've had more and more need to find ways to keep up with work while taking care of other things. In the last couple years, I've started to do a deep dive into the DH resources out there available as audio, things that I can absorb during the cracks of the day. I originally [blogged](https://walshbr.com/blog/resources-for-the-digital-humanist-on-the-go/) about my efforts to start collecting these things as I adjusted to life as a new father. As the collection grew, I kept noticing how idiosyncratic the materials were: I roughly collected whatever I had managed to find whenever I managed to check it out. There's a clear focus on DH infrastructure and digital pedagogy given my own work. My work on speculative pedagogies eventually drew in some Black futurist fiction, a connection that makes all the sense in the world to me but might be confusing without context. 

This iteration of the project aims to be more usable and robust. It's been reworked in a couple key ways: 

* Rather than a private collection, the thing is now open and crowdsourced.
* Rather than a static list, I took some time to do some metadata tagging and take advantage of the sorting options in the JavaScript library I use.

This collection is always going to be incomplete, driven by the interests of those who pay attention to it. But my hope is that by making it public the collection will be a little more representative than it might otherwise be. I make no claims to keeping it updated: I have no safeguards in place to check if YouTube links go down or domains change hands. If something goes dark then at least we'll have evidence that it was there once. Hopefully the aggregated materials here will prove useful to others as well, as they search to multi-task while taking care of other life needs or while they aim to make their one-time DH speaker events live on. 

## How to Contribute

Originally this list was a personal Zotero library, but the current running list of recordings is generated by way of a public and [open Zotero group](https://www.zotero.org/groups/5625243/digital_humanities_on_the_go). This shift means that anyone should be able to join the group and use Zotero to add items to the collection. For ease of use, once you fill out the bibliographic information for your material, please also tag using the available metadata categories. You can always add your own, but I've kept this pretty simple for ease of use,:

* Audio: Audio-first or audio-only recordings. Podcasts and the like.
* Video: Recordings that have a substantial video component. (distinguishing here between, say, a video-recorded talk that has slides vs a recorded interview)
* Collection: there are some situations like [devdh.org](devdh.org) where it felt more helpful to cite the umbrella collection of recordings rather than each of the dozens of recordings that site contains.
* Audiobook: book-length recordings, typically available on Audible. Usually pay to listen.

In terms of relevance and inclusion: I am trying to avoid the perfect being the enemy of the good here. If it seems relevant and useful to you it probably is. Toss it in there. And please do self-promote! Your own recordings are very welcome, as are recordings put out by your center, your conference, etc. And if you contribute to _DH on the Go_ please get in touch so that I can credit you appropriately.

## Tech Specs

The resources are collected in a public and open [Zotero](zotero.org) collection, which is a fantastic citation management system. I'm using a service called [BibBase](https://bibbase.org/) to embed the group's Zotero collection on this page, so this post should be updated in the future as that collection updates. I would recommend [this guide](https://yvonneseale.org/blog/2016/10/23/how-to-embed-a-zotero-bibliography-in-a-web-page/) by Yvonne Seale if you want to embed a Zotero bibliography in this same way on a page of your own. I've modified the CSS a bit to fit the flavor of the surrounding website, but for the most part it's working out of the box. 

## Credits 

I also particularly want to shout out Merisa Martinez who shared a [list of their favorite DH podcasts](https://dhcommons.hypotheses.org/451) a few years ago. Thanks also to Amanda Visconti and Paige Morgan for suggesting some links on social media.

Happy listening.

## The Recordings

(Give a moment for the JavaScript to load. Drop me a line if nothing appears after a little bit.)

<script src='https://bibbase.org/show?bib=https%3A%2F%2Fbibbase.org%2Fzotero-group%2Fbmw9t%2F5625243&jsonp=1&msg=embed&theme=side&groupby=keywords&authorFirst=true&sort=author_short&folding=1&showSearch=true&nocache=1'></script>
