---
layout: post
title: "Music in the Makerspace"
date: 2019-07-15 14:54
categories:
---
Since I work mostly with out students, my volume of work tends to follow the rhythms of the academic calendar. Summers are busy in their own way, with LAMI, HILT, and conferences, but I tend to have a little more room to breathe over the summer. I've been taking some time over the last couple weeks to explore an R&D project or two in the makerspace with some help of Ammon and Shane. I wanted to give an update on how things are going!

I'm a musician, and one of my ongoing goals has been to explore the ways in which this part of my identity might intersect with my professional life as a DH teacher and researcher. I'm still working out what this looks like. For now, I'm trying to learn more about how making can help me give me a clearer and more critical sense of the various technologies that go into music.

One thing I've been working on lately is the [Pedal-Pi](https://www.electrosmash.com/pedal-pi) - a guitar pedal built that works with a Raspberry Pi ZERO. The kit comes with just about every component you need to get going, as opposed to some other models that provide you with a shopping list but let you do the collecting. I'm interested in this project for a few reasons. For one, I don't really have much sense at all how electronics work or how the stuff I'm doing with an instrument gets translated into a digital format and then manipulated. But for another, this pedal is pretty customizable. It comes with a variety of scripts written in C that you can play with, and this combination of prefab solutions with flexible outcomes seems like exactly the sort of thing that I'd want to explore. Ammon ordered two kits for me in case I messed one up. Prophetic!

Things I've learned so far. And of course, standard caveats apply - this is all new material for me.

1. **The electronics aren't the problem (mostly)**. I was terrified I was going to mess something when I first started soldering, and I went super slow. Ironically, the first major issue I had was that I just wasn't paying attention. Even after mentally repeating to myself again and again "OK A,B, and C get soldered into X, Y, and Z," I still accidentally soldering something into hole D. Shane showed me how to use desoldering wick to try to repair the thing. We we were able to heat the solder again and pull out the component that was in the wrong place, but that hole is filled with solder now. In order to clear the hole so that I can put new components in it I'll need to get a finer tip for our soldering iron.

If you look closely at the C12 circle here you can see the remnants of the solder from where I put a component in the incorrect hole.

2. **Like anything else, you get better with practice**. I put a couple hours of work into the first pedal before I made the above mistake and shifted gears to start working on the backup pedal. With that experience under my belt, I watched a couple soldering videos online to brush up. I was surprised to find that a lot of the bad results I was getting were because I was too afraid. I wasn't applying enough heat to the board or the component to get the solder to really flow and connect will. Fear is the mind-killer, and it also makes for some pretty lousy solder joints. I was moving about five times as quickly on the second pedal and my work looked a lot better. I also started to compartmentalize the work a little. Rather than soldering one thing, checking my progress, and moving on, I would get several components in place before soldering them all at once. A lot quicker, easier, and more effective.

3. **Even with electronics you can correct mistakes**. I mentioned the desoldering wick above, a material that Shane used to draw out unwanted solder so that we could correct my mistakes. But I was surprised how many of the physical decisions we were making - decisions that felt permanent - could still be undone. At one point, Shane went over a number of my joint and corrected them to make them stronger and better connections to conduct the current. I think I had this view that circuit like this either worked or did not, but I was impressed with how a little tinkering could help you move between categories. I'm certain there are limits to all this, but I was surprised just how much I could work with.

4. **People out in the world were having the same issues I was**. The instructions for the Pedal-Pi are pretty thorough and helpful, but there was at least one spot where they seemed to assume a degree of familiarity with DIY electronics that I did not possess. In most cases, the instructions do a great job of letting you know when particular components have polarities that require them to be soldered in place in particular directions. The components help you out as well to keep positive and negative sides straight. One piece, however, didn't mention anything about orientation being meaningful. Two dip 8 sockets THAT DO WHAT. Presumably, this is a thing that those more familiar with circuits would just know. I checked online, though, and I was not the first person to have soldered a dip socket incorrectly. Allegedly, so long as I remember which socket is in backwards and adapt accordingly the board should operate fine.

5. **SOMETHING SOMETHING SOMETHING**. While it's an oversimplification, I've sometimes thought of my work with music as ephemeral. When you paint something, you have a physical thing. If you sculpt something, you have a physical thing. But when I practice my instrument that craft is lost. A performance disappears unless there is a recording of it. The work in the makerspace has been interesting for the ways in which it connects me with all the physical aspects of the music process. My trumpet is the product of centuries of engineering that are configured to help it sound just so, even if the performance that comes out of the other end might be fleeting. And the work with the electronics in the makerspace has made me want to think more about all the different components of the pipeline, all the different pieces of hardware and software that affect the aesthetic experience of a piece of music.

Stay tuned for further reflections on this makerspace work in the future.

Add photos and fill in the missing pieces.
