---
layout: post
title: "Praxis Workshops"
date: 2019-05-14 14:04
categories: 
---
One thing I've realized about the Praxis Program, our year-long, soup-to-nuts introduction to digital humanities for a cohort of doctoral students, is that it changes each year. In my first year here this stressed me out. Surely, I thought there must be a way to systematize it, to find a format that would be more consistent, and, thus, more sustainable. In the last two years on the job here I've come to accept the tweaks we make as part of the program's strength. Rather than being locked into what we've done in the past, we're committed to re-examining our assumptions and our plans. We've been running exit surveys at the end of each cycle for a few years now, and we cap each year with a debrief conversation among the staff (and, occasionally, students) involved. Last year's conversation brought a lot of changes, and I want to document some of these in case they're helpful for others. I'll try to share both the problem we perceived in the structure of curriculum and the ways in which we tried to go about addressing it. Hopefully, this combination will give readers out there in the blogosphere a sense of both the theoretical and practical dimensions of the work we do.

To begin, one thing I realized at the end of last year was that, for all of our talk about how the program was meant to be a curricular intervention in graduate studies, our students left without much of a sense of digital pedagogy. That is to say, we offer the program as a kind of on-the-ground, hands-on training in the practical work of digital humanists, but we were framing that work almost exclusively in the context of research projects. By making a digital project the primary outcome of the year, even though we encouraged students to document their process as the year went along, we seemed to suggest that the work of a digital humanist is primarily project development. That might be true for a certain kind of digital humanities work, but it also leaves out so much of what these careers entail. 

So we decided to take a month or so of the program and insert a new unit that I would construct on digital pedagogy. In addition to introducing the topic, part of our goal was to create a space for other kinds of outcomes for the year. Rather than having the single group project be the primary takeaway, I wanted our students to start thinking about the year as a portfolio of experiences with lots of different materials they could point to as their own. This addition would help address one issue we've consistently found with the group project, which was that, by its very nature, it involves a degree of compromise from each student in the group. If the project feels too far afield from an individual student's research agenda, it can be difficult to sell them on why they should remain engaged in the collective work. Expanding the range of results for the students gave us new opportunities to create moments that would speak directly to the students' research interests in a clearer way than we had in past. 

I called the introductory session to the digital pedagogy unit a "Workshop on Workshops," a title that I took from a piece [Zoe LeBlanc](https://zoeleblanc.com/) and I coauthored for the forthcoming _#DLFTeach Toolkit_. That upcoming piece shares a spirit and material with what follows here, though with a different theoretical framing and written for a different audience. Stay tuned, then, for more. What follows is the implementation of it I gave for Praxis.

The assignment I gave the students over the course of the month we spent on digital pedagogy was to create the structure for a ninety-minute digital humanities workshop related in some way to their own research interests. They certainly weren't expected to know everything about the topic, but they could learn just enough to teach to learn. And, in an attempt to introduce them to a particular form of pedagogy that I tend to traffic in, I asked their workshop be a "low-tech, pencil and paper (ish) digital humanities workshop." In terms of actual, tangible outcomes, at this stage I just asked they work towards having a blog post length pitch with the idea, framing, and beginning skeleton for their session. They didn't need to plan enough to actually give the workshop (yet! stay tuned, dear reader), but I wanted evidence that they had made significant progress in that direction. And the plan was that throughout the month we would workshop the materials together. 

I suggested pencil and paper as a constraint by way of a reading we gave the students - "[Beyond Buttonology: Digital Humanities, Digital Pedagogy, and the ACRL Framework](https://crln.acrl.org/index.php/crlnews/article/view/16833/18427)" by John E. Russell and Merinda Kaye Hensley. In particular, we opened the discussion with this quotation from the piece:

> Knowing how to upload texts into a tool like Voyant does not help researchers think about what texts should be uploaded, how selecting data relates to a research question, or even what constitutes an effective research question.

The challenge for the students was to take seriously the provocation of the article, to get beyond workshops geared towards interfaces and tools (beyond buttonology) and towards concepts and methods. In doing so, I hoped, the students would realize that they could effectively approach and teach complicated digital humanities concepts as newcomers, even if they might be otherwise unfamiliar with the tools that might often be used to address these research questions. In fact, we found that learning about the former meant they felt more comfortable exploring, evaluating, and recommending these tools to others. 

After introducing the concept of buttonology, we discussed the concept by way of reflecting on past technology workshops we had attended - what did good teaching look like in those contexts? What did less successful teaching look like? We then got specific. In order to set the stage for this exploration, I modeled an example workshop for them by giving an introduction to sentiment analysis using pencil and paper. I've written about [this particular workshop at length](http://walshbr.com/blog/ways-to-read/), so I won't fully rehash the approach. Suffice it to say that I introduced the concept of sentiment analysis, asked the students to mark up a passage for positive and negative polarity, and then used the resultant discussion to surface many of the underlying, humanistic issues with the methodology. I've taught versions of this workshop in a number of contexts, but the difference in this context was that I approached it like something of a supervised laboratory experiment. I gave the workshop as normal, but interspersed throughout it I described the theoretical and practical reasons behind my pedagogical choices. It felt a lot like I was running two workshops simultaneously - the first was an introduction to text analysis, and the second was a meta conversation on the pedagogical environment and experience I conducted as I went. After the workshop ended, we took a few minutes to reflect on the work. We talked about the advantages (discussion based, little room for technological failure) and disadvantages (difficult to connect it back to things they could immediately use) of the approach. 

This mix of practical experience and theoretical reflection would come to be crucial in the coming months as we con

scaffolding the workshop
giving the workshop itself
the audience
