---
layout: post
title: "The Shape of DH Work to Come"
date: 2023-05-10 08:18
categories: 
---

Several years ago I wrote a blog post entitled "[What is Praxis Working on?](https://walshbr.com/blog/what-is-praxis-working-on/)" The TL; DR of that post was that I regularly have people approach me (students included!) to ask what the current cohort of [Praxis](https://praxis.scholarslab.org)–our project-based introduction to digital humanities–is currently doing. Typically, that question is a shorthand for asking after the [big, branded final project](https://praxis.scholarslab.org/projects/). In that post, I argued that such questions miss the point: the digital projects our students taken on have always been a means to an end to give the students space to practice, but the real projects are the students themselves. And we're really working on being better for them. 

Over the years, we've revised the program in a range of ways. We've become more systematic about the topics and workshops we offer, coalescing around a more intentional [curriculum](https://praxis.scholarslab.org/curriculum/). Realizing that for all of our teacherly ambitions we did not discuss pedagogy very much in the program, we implemented a [pedagogy unit where students pilot workshops and document them for others](https://scholarslab.lib.virginia.edu/visiting-workshops-at-washington-and-lee-university/). And a desire for more intentional project development took us down the path of collaborating with [library](https://unclosure.scholarslab.org/) and [community stakeholders](https://landandlegacy.scholarslab.org/index.html) for the end-of-year projects. 

Part of this work involved compressing the end-of-year project to make room for these developments. What had been 80% of the year became two-thirds became one half. Despite however much I wanted our program to focus on a range of experiences, they all seemed to build towards a project experience that, for the students, wound up feeling like the major takeaway and centerpiece. That is to say–I felt a consistent tension between the goals of the program as we articulated them and the attempt to have students develop a project wholesale from scratch each year. The role of the project was to offer hands-on experiences for their own sake rather than as necessarily a research project in itself, but that was often a tough sell for students. After all, the academy rewards CV lines, and our projects frequently received awards and publications. Of course the students wanted to aim for those possibilities. But no matter how we conceived it–giving the students full freedom to make their own way or more directly handing them a project to work on–I saw pro's and con's either way. Working with a cohort of students brought together by an application process rather than shared methodological, disciplinary, or topical interests, student investment and, subsequently, takeaways from the final project wildly varied. The example I usually use is that, if you're fundamentally uninterested in VR it can be tough to swallow working on a VR project intensely for a semester just for the good of learning. 

At the same time, I increasingly felt that the intense focus on hands-on technical training perhaps misrepresented the kinds of work that we do as digital humanists. Technical work is certainly a piece of the DH world, but the arc of the Praxis year sometimes felt as though, to the students, the experience didn't start until they were building a thing. And I remember similar experiences when I was a young student myself visiting conferences and elder DHers would ask me what my digital project was. I remember thinking "Do I have to have one? Is all DH projects? Am I not a DH person unless I have a research project?" The answer, of course, is that you don't; it's not; and you are. 

Put another way: when we say methodological training in the digital humanities, we cannot reduce it to technical skills. So much of our day-to-day work in the lab extends beyond the building of things. Community building. Teaching. Learning. Talking. Thinking. Event planning. Project design and management. These are all measurable skills, and they've all been a part of the program since its beginning. We wanted the students to see the year as a portfolio of experiences but the real estate taken up by each component was uneven. In the rush to build a thing, we sometimes lost sight of why, for whom, and what was meant to be learned along the way. What was meant to be project-based pedagogy sometimes felt like it was a project first and pedagogy second.

 This intense focus on delivering a digital project through the program by the end of the semester often led to weeks and months of sprinting and left students and staff alike burnt out by the end of the year. Taking a hard look at what we were doing, what was working, and what was not was an attempt to honor our [charter](https://scholarslab.lib.virginia.edu/charter/) and "build up people and practices over products." Is it worth producing a quality digital product at the end of the year at the cost of the hearts and minds of those involved? Or might there be a better way? It's no coincidence that these particular redesigns to the program emerged roughly at the same time as we all continued to reckon with ongoing crises in higher education, public health, and more. Part of our hope in reworking the year was to find the spaces where the learning experiences were not worth the churn. It's easier for students to see how DH will fit into their futures if they have space to look up and breath during the pace of the year. And staff need the space and flexibility to carry out teaching in a healthy way. Foundational to our pedagogy is the hope that we teach and learn in a way that makes space life outside the Lab. The changes this year were an attempt to incorporate breath and pause, rest into what had otherwise become an annual marathon. 

All of this is context for what has felt for some like a dramatic shift this year but, to me at least, feels like the logical step forward in a yearslong process of trying to find the best possible way to ground our activities in pedagogy and people first. The old structure I often felt left students too rushed to reflect on their work and the staff too busy to help make space for them to do so. The new arrangement aims to give students time to think through what they are doing and why, and it fosters dialogue with staff because everyone has more space to work. In practical terms, we've shifted further towards framing the year as a portfolio of experiences in a series of units, each with their own deliverables. 

* Communities of DH
    * Deliverable: a group statement of values
* DH Teaching and Learning
    * Deliverables: a pencil-and-paper DH workshop based on their interest and a teaching statement informed by digital pedagogy
* DH Research and Administration
    * Deliverables: speculative project design and event planning exercises

This portion of the year opens and closes with a pair of exercises grounded in the students' individual research agenda. In the fall we design jam on each student's interests as a way to show them the avenues their work might take in DH. In the spring each student proposes a project they might work on after Praxis, and the group gives feedback for making the thing a reality. 

At the same time, we expanded the technical component of the year. We've offered a semester-long introduction to code for several years now as a part of the program that we call CodeLab. That curriculum now has a companion piece in DesignLab, a ten-week introduction to critical approaches to design for Digital Humanities work in a range of technologies. This technical track runs in parallel throughout the year as a lab, that component that meets weekly in conjunction with our other general work. Then, in April, all other work for the program stops and the students engage in a short-term prototyping exercise, somewhere between a hackathon and a semesterlong project. The students spent four weeks coming together to scope, design, and begin to implement a small draft of a draft together. This is what has become of the yearlong fellowship projects of past years. Our hope was that lowering the stakes while keeping some of the urgency might allow us a space in which students could still practice what they learned while not overselling expectations or ambitions. 

We still have some tinkering to do next year, but I've been pleased with how the students responded to the changes. My sense is that this group of students has the best sense of where DH will take them next and the technical experiences to get them there, even if this year did not result in a finalized product launched and released to the world. That is to say, the project-building portion of the year feels a bit more commensurate to the other pieces of the year and, to my eye, better reflects the different paths that one might take through DH. Praxis continues to reimagine graduate methodological training for the demands of the humanities in the digital age, even as the shape of that work continues to change.  I'm very grateful to all of my colleagues for their help in making these changes possible in what I hope is a better and more sustainable program for all of us especially Amanda, Shane, Jeremy, Ronda, and Laura. 