---
layout: post
title: "origin story"
date: 2023-06-06
categories: ["Scholars Lab", 'alt-ac', 'pedagogy']
---
During professional development conversations, students often ask me to talk about my own path that brought me to where I am today. I thought I would document it here in the spirit of the Origin Stories shared through the [Speaking in Code](https://codespeak.scholarslab.org/starting/) event in the lab. It feels particularly self-indulgent to share all this publicly, but since local students keep asking hopefully it will be useful to others as well. This post will be a little more detailed than those conversations. I'll try to save reflections for the end.

I was a big tech nerd growing up. I played video games obsessively. As young as I was asked, I told people that I planned on being a video game developer and was going to ride my bike to Seattle to enroll in [Digipen](https://www.digipen.edu/). This cross-country bike ride never materialized, in part because in high school I took AP Computer Science and hated it. I did fine in the course, but I absolutely hated the process of writing code with pencil and paper. That learning experience turned me off from any potential career in the field. At the same time, my interests in music and literature were growing because of fantastic teachers. I wound up studying the latter subjects in college and leaving behind the tech interests. 

When i started my PhD program in English at UVA I had never heard of digital humanities. Fresh out of a terminal MA degree at the same institution, I somehow missed all the DH work going on at UVA already. Even had I heard about it, I probably would have assumed it was not for me based on my past negative experiences learning programming. I was ultimately pulled into the orbit of DH and the Scholars' Lab by a few historical coincidences:

1. I started my PhD in English in 2011
2. The [Praxis Program](https://praxis.scholarslab.org/) also started in 2011
3. Because it was the first year of the program, Praxis did not have a university-wide reputation just yet. So the applicant was lopsided towards particular disciplines. The first cohort consisted of five students from English and one from Art History.
4. Because of point three, I knew a *lot* of people taking part in the Praxis program their first year. 

I observed from the outside as my friends got a hands-on, rapid introduction to a range of DH methods and conversations. I saw their work on [Prism](http://prism.scholarslab.org/), a tool for crowdsourcing textual interpretation. At the same time, I was just starting to develop my [dissertation topic](https://libraetd.lib.virginia.edu/public_view/sb397846h) on sound recordings and literature. My initial interest in DH was based on this work in multimedia. I thought surely a dissertation on audio would be best served by thinking beyond a printed page. Technology could help. And the growing reputation of the Scholars' Lab among my friends was that it was a space in which newcomers and experienced programmers alike could find a home. I thought I would give it another shot. 

I applied for the Praxis program in 2012 and didn't make the cut. I was waitlisted, so I assumed that was that–DH wasn't for me. Shortly thereafter I attended ThatCampUVA and sheepishly avoided all the Scholars' Lab based on lingering feelings of rejection. Months later and right before the next academic year I got a call from Eric Johnson to let me know that a student had withdrawn from the fellowship. I hopped off the waitlist and took part in the second Praxis cohort. The Praxis Program for me was a broad introduction to digital humanities development as I worked on a Ruby on Rails application. But really the thing stuck was a different way of thinking about my potential future and the way that I related to work. 

After the Praxis fellowship I bounced around a few different DH opportunities during the rest of my graduate degree. I project managed for [NINES](https://nines.org/). I worked on the backend of a [now defunct website for teaching rhetoric and composition](https://news.virginia.edu/content/little-red-schoolhouse-opens-online-campus). I started working with [Eric Rochester 1:1 to learn about text analysis](https://walshbr.com/blog/dh-mentoring/). And I taught at [HILT](https://dhtraining.org/hilt) with Wayne Graham to get some more teaching chops. Laid out all at once like that, it sounds like I had a robust set of experiences professionalizing me in DH. At the time, things all felt very scattershot and taken on by random chance. I jumped at whatever opportunities appeared, but it never felt as though there was a clear path through school towards DH.

I had never really thought of DH as a real career even though I was accumulating a series of experiences in that direction. Two conversations, in particular, helped me to see DH as a viable option for my future. 

I professionalized during my degree as though I was planning to go on the job market. I published, went to conferences, etc. But I remember having a conversation with my dissertation director Michael Levenson towards the end of my degree about how my heart wasn't in it. I explained to him that I felt pulled towards three different directions: my research, teaching, and digital humanities. He generously asked me why I was planning to apply to jobs I fundamentally didn't want and encouraged me to embrace the pieces of my experience that really moved me. "Why would we only want people with PhDs in Universities?" is a quote from that discussion that stuck with me.  Many are not so lucky to have an advisor who was so willing to see futures beyond the professoriate. 

The second conversation took place with Wayne while walking back from teaching programming together at HILT. Around the same time that my advisor helped free my own thinking from going on the academic market for its own sake, I had also just started dating my wife, and she still had a few more years left at UVA. I suddenly had personal reasons for wanting to stay semi-local. Two regional opportunities popped up around the same time: a developer working in the UVA Library on Virgo, our search engine, and a postdoctoral fellowship at Washington and Lee focused on digital humanities. I didn't feel qualified for either, but Wayne and the Scholars' Lab encouraged me to think of my scattershot experiences as valuable. They provided invaluable help to me as I went through the application process. I ultimately wound up taking the W&L postdoc for a number of reasons. The postdoc was more squarely a digital humanities position. It was also four years (an enormous and unusual length for a postdoc). And while they both focused on programming, I had the sense that the W&L position would be more flexible and allow me to move in different directions.

I stayed in the Washington and Lee Postdoc for just 15 months of the promised four years. I had hardly any experience in the small liberal arts scene, and in my time at W&L I came to deeply admire how pedagogy suffused all the work they did. These experiences helped me to shape a body of interests that could join what had until now felt like distinct pieces of my personality. Rather than thinking of DH, teaching, and research as separate, WLUDH showed me that these could all be one and the same. My colleagues at WLUDH made space for the position to grow with me. I still did some development work, but I was free to work more in the direction of pedagogy, curricular development, and OER than intended. I was actually teaching when I got a notification that UVA had posted the Head of Graduate Programs position.

In this context, the return to UVA, to the Scholars' Lab, and my current position made a lot of sense. I was returning back to help administer the very programs that shaped me into the scholar practitioner that I was when I got that notification. The Scholars' Lab position was an opportunity to take the work I had done at W&L with teaching and return to a program that I could shape for years to come. From a personal standpoint, I was looking at the difference between an 80 minute and an 15 minute commute. And the move was also a jump from term-limited, contract employment to a position in which I was salaried on hard money. All the same, I gnashed my teeth about the decision quite a bit. WLUDH and my colleagues there (shout out to Mackenzie Brooks and Julie Kane in particular) had made the space a really generative space one that I was reluctant to leave. I remember taking a photo of an overlook on Route 81 on the afternoon of my last commute to commemorate the experience. 

And that's where I've been for the last six years and some change, coincidentally starting work at the Scholars' Lab on the same day as my supervisor Amanda Visconti. I am eternally full of gratitude to the many mentors, collaborators, and friends who helped guide me on this path and gave advice as I struggled with decisions at hingepoints. But I am also keenly how much of my own path is the result of fortuitious circumstances. Every time we run a fellowship application cycle I think about how my own life was changed by being on a waitlist. Every time I talk with a student I think about how fortunate I was to get the right encouragement at the right time. And I also am keenly aware of how much privlige I enjoy–both as a cis white man and as someone at a well-funded institution with resources to learn digital humanities. I see a direct line between the rambling path I took through graduate school and my current efforts to organize with UCWVA-UVA. I want to see an academy in which we don't just pay our own good fortune forward to the next generation of graduate students but also one in which the path walked by the next person might be a little easier to follow.